Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this is one of a
series of foundational videos on mathematics in
particular we are looking towards establishing
proper foundations for a geometry and so in the
last few videos we've been looking at Euclid's
elements which is the most important book in the
subject and has a lot of interesting things to
say about foundational issues for geometry now
today we're going to have a very brief look at
books 6 to 13 last video we talked about book 5
which established Eudoxus theory of proportions
book 6 uses that theory to talk about similar
figures in particular similar triangles so these
two triangles are similar because they have equal
angles and I remind you that by equal angles you
could means that if you take that configuration
which is what he called an angle and you move
it over here it fits right on top of that so
if these triangles have equal angles and so are
similar then there are certain relations between
the proportions formed by these magnitudes and
the proportions formed by these magnitudes now
remember it's very important to remember that
Euclid did not use numbers to describe the
lengths of sides he thought of a magnitude like
a length as an independent quantity independent
of any number system so the consequence of
the similarity of these two triangles is in
these proportions between magnitudes that a
to B that proportion is equal to a prime to
be from and similarly B to C is B prime C prime
and a to C is a prime to C Prime all three can
be put together into one single proportion a to
B to C equals a prime to B prime to C Prime the
books seven eight and nine with number theory and
they're not directly connected with our approach
to geometry right now book 10 is dealing with
incommensurable numbers for example Euclid shows
how to geometrically understand what we would
call as a number of root of root 2 plus root 3
so this nested kind of radicals its books 11 12
and 13 that are quite interesting because that's
when Euclid branches out into solid geometry or
into three-dimensional geometry and there are a
lot of interesting and difficult results in these
books culminating in term the grand finale of the
classification of the platonic solids so let's
just have a quick look at some of the issues that
are raised in these books Euclid begins by some
definitions for example a solid is that which has
length breadth and depth an extremity of a solid
is what he calls a surface he defines planes he
defines what it means for a straight line to be at
right angles to a plane it's a right angles when
it makes right angles with any line in the plane
which meets it there are many other definitions of
spheres solids like tetrahedrons and convex bodies
and prisms but it's probably fair to say that
these definitions aren't completely satisfactory
you really have to have a sense of what these
things are beforehand in order to understand what
he's talking about in fact in general these latter
books represent Euclid biting off a little bit
more than he could chew it's just the fact that
three-dimensional geometry is a lot harder than
two-dimensional geometry and that's manifested in
these books in that a lot of the theorems are not
quite logically correct there are gaps there are
weak points there are times when he only proves
things in special cases but nevertheless there
are a lot of interesting results and important
results for example prappas two of book 12 states
that circles are to each other as the squares
on the diameters he's saying that if you have
two circles then the proportion between their
areas is equal to the proportion between the
squares on the diameters in our language that's
saying that the area of a circle is proportional
to the square of the radius or the square of the
diameter that's an important result that you click
new you can't just take for read it has to be
demonstrated something that's almost universally
never done in modern courses in mathematics
how did he do it he went back to his friend
Eudoxus Eudoxus had developed something called
the theory of exhaustion which is an approach to
areas of say curved regions by inscribing
polygons and then in a sequence of steps
approximating the area of the curved surface
better and better by these inscribed polygons
and in this case what that amounts to is if
you have a circle and you put a square inside
it that's a first approximation to the area then
the next approximation is obtained by taking the
midpoint of this arc and joining it to form a
little isosceles triangle you do that at each
one of these sides to form an octagon and the
crucial point is that this triangle that you
added is more than half of the area of that
arc there the reason we know that is because
if you put that arc inside a rectangle that
one there then the area of this triangle here
is exactly half of the area of the rectangle
and so has to be more than half of the area of
that arc so that's the basis of this theory of
exhaustion that if you always go more to take
away more than half of what's remaining then
eventually you get something approaching zero
so there are many other results in these books
but final grand culmination is a construction of
the five platonic solids the tetrahedron the
cube the octahedron the icosahedron and the
dodecahedron all together Euclid's achievement
is a remarkable one and it's no surprise that
it established the foundations of mathematics
for 2,000 years afterwards however cracks did
appear and that we've already mentioned a
few next time we're going to have a better
look at some of the difficulties that arise with
Euclid's geometry towards our goal of replacing
it with a simpler and better approach I
hope you'll join me I'm Norman Wildberger